So, I want us to run through the forms of haber, this to have that we use to go into the past.
We said that we can remember them by looking at the two vowel sounds that we have inside the word haber.
So give me I have and we have:
He and hemos.
Good.
And give me the rest of the versions.
Ha, has, han.
Good.
We said that nouns ending A are feminine nouns.
So, for example, the house - la casa.
So words ending A are feminine, but
Words ending MA are masculine.
There's a small group of words that end MA which are masculine words.
For example, the problem in Spanish is el problema.
El problema.
Good.
How would you say?
Have you understood the problem?
What was to understand?
Comprender.
Good.
We can use Comprender.
Or we can use entender.
But comprender is perfect here as well.
Have you understood the problem?
And let's talk
formally, to usted.
¿Ha entendido el problema?
Good.
So a very common error for people learning Spanish is to say la problema.
Now if we look at why these words ending M-A
are actually masculine is going to help us internalize it.
So these words the M the M A actually come from Greek.
Problema in Greek is provlima.
System in Greek is systima.
In Spanish, it's sistema.
So how would you say the system?
El sistema.
So it's el.
Now in Greek these words are neuter words.
In Greek you have masculine, feminine, and neuter.
And neutral words in Greek look like masculine words.
They have a similar word for the.
They look kind of like masculine words.
So when they went in
to Spanish or into Latin, they could mistaken as masculine words.
So if we can identify them, there's a key group of words we can avoid committing this error with.
If it ends M A
It's probably from Greek and probably masculine.
So how would you say the system again?
El sistema.
How would you say have you understood the system?
Talking informally.
Have you understood the system?
¿Has entendido el sistema?
Good.
Sentir, in Spanish.
Sentir is to feel.
Related to sensation, so sentir, to feel.
And you can also use it like to perceive in the sense of smell.
So if you wanted to ask for example, have you felt the aroma?
It would be a way of asking, have you smelt the aroma?
Have you felt it?
So how would you say that?
Have you felt the aroma?
¿Has sentido el aroma?
Good.
So el again.
So we have el: el problema, el sistema, el programa, el aroma, el panorama. El clima, which is a little bit different in English, which means climate, el clima. And some others.
Have you understood the program?
¿Has entendido el programa?
Good.
Again, how was to lose? (Perishable)
Perdir.
Close.
Perder.
Perder. Good. So how would you say I have lost?
He perdido.
Good. Now what if you wanted to emphasize I have lost?
Yo he perdido.
Good.
Now if you want to say I have got lost, I have got lost,
Now if you want to say I have got lost, I've got lost
You can just say I've lost myself.
We said I get ready is I prepare myself.
Me preparo.
We don't use this in Spanish, I get ready.
You say I ready myself.
Me preparo.
So you don't say I get lost or I have got lost.
You say I have lost myself.
So how would you say that?
Me he perdido.
Again.
Yes, when you say it fluently, it doesn't actually sound any different, which is why I asked for again to make sure that you were putting it.
Because the /e/
of me and the /e/ of he
will blend together.
Me he perdido.
So that means I have lost myself or I've got lost.
Now what if you wanted to be emphatic as well and say I have lost myself?
Yo me he perdido.
Good.
How is you have lost?
Speaking informally.
Has perdido.
Good.
We said that the word for you in the sense of you lose, you see, not I see you, but you see.
is tú for informal you: tú, t-u.
Tú.
So how would you say you have lost being emphatic?
Tú ha perdido.
There's a bit of a contradiction there.
Tú has perdido.
Good.
Tu has perdido.
So just as me can mean me, or myself, te can mean you or yourself.
So how would you say you have got lost?
You have lost yourself.
Te has perdido.
Good.
And what if you wanted to be emphatic as well?
Tú te has perdido.
Good.
Very good.
What was we have, from haber?
Hemos.
Good.
How would you say we have lost it?
We have lost it
Lo hemos perdido.
Lo hemos perdido. Now how would you say we have lost ourselves, or we've got lost?
Nos hemos perdido.
Good. Nos hemos perdido. And what if you wanted to say WE have got lost, WE have lost ourselves?
Nosotros nos hemos perdido.
Good. Nosotros nos hemos perdido. Good.